Jamieson issues warning to bigots

Scotland's justice minister has warned bigoted soccer fans that she wants to hit them "where it hurts most" by banning them from matches.

Cathy Jamieson said exclusion orders are one of a series of measures being considered in the Scottish Executive campaign against sectarianism. She praised Celtic and Rangers for their work in tackling the problem. However, the minister said stopping sectarian abuse associated with Old Firm matches is a key objective. Ms Jamieson was speaking ahead of the third round Scottish Cup clash between the Glasgow clubs at Parkhead on Sunday. The sectarianism long associated with sections of the support from both clubs has become a significant target for the executive. Last week Ms Jamieson and First Minister Jack McConnell met supporters' representatives from both clubs to discuss the issue.

They plan to hold an anti-sectarian summit next month with officials from the clubs, church leaders, senior police officers and local authority chiefs among those to be invited. Speaking on BBC Radio Scotland's Sunday Live programme, Ms Jamieson described Friday's meeting as "very productive" and said putting the squeeze on the bigots would be a key aim. Ms Jamieson stressed that sectarianism has not been confined to football but it can act as a "trigger" for tensions and violence. Clubs have taken action in the past to ban troublesome fans and supporters' groups expressed their desire to ensure that the game is no longer tainted by the problem.

Ms Jamieson said the executive should have a role in tackling the soccer troublemakers. She said: "We can't get away from the fact that in some instances some of the religious hatred that some people try to associate with football boils over into violence. "That is the kind of thing we want to stop and that's the kind of thing supporters' groups are very clear they don't want to be part of either, and they will work with us to try and deal with that."

Ms Jamieson praised the police for their action and said: "The police do want to identify whether there are particular individuals who are going over the top and inciting hatred or violence - they will crack down very effectively on them. "We have of course already indicated that we will consider the introduction of banning orders to give additional powers to where there are people who are going over the top, who have made inappropriate behaviour at football matches, to be able to stop them attending the games. "That's the kind of thing that will hit those kind of people where it hurts the most in not allowing them to attend the games," she said. Praising Celtic and Rangers for their efforts, she said: "I don't think there is any doubt that we have seen some positive moves from the clubs. "Both Rangers and Celtic football clubs have been involved in working with the executive to produce, for example, an educational pack for young people."
